---
title: 'Is Artificial Intelligence (AI) your friend?'
date: 2025-09-02
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - artificial intelligence
  - ChatGPT
  - ethics
  - moral
---

AI is evolving at the breakneck speed causing both excitement and alarm.

<h1>Introduction</h1>

<p>The idea of creating an artificial machine that can think, act, and solve problems has captivated humans for centuries. From the 1950s until the 1990s, many scientists and mathematicians explored the concept of a machine with intelligence. In the 90s the general purpose computer was made available widely to the public (e.g., IBM PC x86 series). However, during that time, computers were not powerful enough to store a massive amount of data or process information quickly enough to communicate meaningfully with a person (Anhoya, 2020). The breakthrough in machine intelligence occurred in the 2010s, whereby scientists can run neural networks with many layers of artificial neurons that mimic neurons in the human brain, a system known as deep neural networks using a deep learning technique (Strickland, 2023). Since then, artificial machine technology has significantly progressed, enabling computer systems to understand, make decisions, and self-learn from human interaction, which surpasses human performance in many routine tasks (Russel & Norvig, 2020). </p>

<p>AI is technology that is designed to solve complex problem by learning from massive amount of data and often programmed to engage activities that require human intelligence (Russel & Norvig, 2020). AI can perform variety of human-like tasks such as reasoning, problem solving, and making decisions. One prominent AI tool is ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023). ChatGPT consists of various technologies, such as speech recognition, natural language processing, machine translation, computer vision, and text-to-speech, that enable natural conversation with humans (T. Wu et al., 2023). It has the unique ability to generate innovative ideas, explore alternative solutions, and offer imaginative suggestions. ChatGPT can respond using multiple modalities, including text, voice, and images, making it a versatile tool for problem-solving, content generation, and design (Huang & Huang, 2023).</p>

<p>We can view ChatGPT as a language model that has been trained with a large volume of data from books, encyclopedias, and web contents (OpenAI, 2023). As a result, ChatGPT has a wealth of knowledge spanning various fields of science and humanities, covering content that humans have authored throughout the course of human civilisation. Hence, ChatGPT has the capability of logical reasoning and thinking and can respond to human questions or instructions.
</p>

<h1> Current State of the AI</h1>

<p>AI-generated media content is easy to generate using publicly available software. These computer-generated media are also known as deepfakes. Deepfakes are currently prevalent on the internet and social media, and they exist as text, voice, images, and videos.<p>


<h1> Morality and Ethics of AI</h1>
Some questions/topics on this subject:

<p>1. Can we use ChatGPT (AI) to guide our moral decisions?</p>
This article by Sebastian Krügel et al., titled "ChatGPT’s inconsistent moral advice influences users’ judgment" give some insights into the morality of AI.
<p>2. Can AI tools be used to infringe on a copyright owner's exclusive rights?</p>
This news article from the BBC: <a href="https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-65298834">AI-generated Drake and The Weeknd song goes viral</a> sheds some light on the controversy. It boils down to the question of whether the use of AI will 'erode' human creativity when AI tools are not used responsibly or misdirected.</p>
<p>3. Is AI biased?<p>
Several studies show that ChatGPT is inherently biased toward particular social values and political spectrums (Fujimoto & Takemoto, 2023, Rozado, 2023, Rutinowski et al., 2024). For example, Rozado (2023) found that ChatGPT exhibits a left-libertarian orientation. Moreover, when considering gender and race, ChatGPT's response may also induce political biases (Fujimoto & Takemoto, 2023). For instance, if gender is taken into account, the ChatGPT responses tend to lean toward a specific political standpoint. When ChatGPT is used in real- world scenarios, it can lead to political division, polarisation, and discriminatory behaviours against specific populations.

<h1> References </h1>

Anhoya, R. (2020, April 23). The History of artificial intelligence - Science in the news. Science
in the News. https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2017/history-artificial-intelligence/

Rozado, D. (2023). The political biases of ChatGPT. Social Sciences, 12(3), 148. https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci12030148

Russell, S. J. 1., Norvig, P., & Davis, E. (2020). Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice Hall.


<p><b>Disclaimer:</b>The opinions expressed on this website are my own and do not represent the views or positions of my employer. I share these thoughts in my personal capacity and during my own free time.</p>
